feat(blog): add 2.9 release blogpost (#2065)
kumahq/kuma-website: app/_posts/2024-11-05-kuma-2-9-0.md

---
title: Kuma 2.9 release with MeshTLS, Service redesign, GUI updates and more...
description: Kuma 2.9 release with MeshTLS, Service redesign, GUI updates and more...
date: 2024-11-06
headerImage: /assets/images/blog/test-header.jpg
tags:
  - Release
---

We're excited to announce the biggest release of Kuma since 2.0! 
In this release we offer a complete beta release of our service rework and namespaced policies.

# Notable features
In Kuma 2.9.x we've focused on 3 main areas:
* `MeshTLS` which provides a more granular way to roll out strict Mutual TLS.
* New resources `MeshService` and `MeshMultiZoneService` which provide a more intuitive and powerful way to manage services in your mesh.

> * A complete rework of our destination policy attachment which works with the new services. 

Reviewer: should we mention producer/consumer policies inn notable features, it changes how drastically how polcies are merged and applied to services

This set of features greatly simplifies Kuma's user experience, by making it clearer how services exist and by attaching policies
to specific resources. These changes are also fully integrated with our GUI thus making things incredible easy to understand and troubleshoot.

> We believe this to be a very first step in

Reviewer: end of sentence is missing

Feel free to check our [release notes](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/releases/tag/2.9.0) for the full list of changes.

> ## `MeshTLS`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `MeshTLS` policy
```

> Mutual TLS is one of the most common use cases in Kuma. This is because it's the base on which you can build fully secured 0 trust environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mutual TLS is one of the most common use cases in Kuma. This is because it's the base on which you can build fully secured zero trust environments.
```

We are always looking for more input on these challenges, if you are willing to share please feel free to reach out to us on [slack](https://kuma.io/community/).

## `MeshService` and `MeshMutlizoneService`

Kuma from the beginning have implicitly extracted services from its data planes.
While this was convenient to get started it was coming with the following shortcomings:

- It wasn't possible to have multiple services fronting the same port of a data plane, this is required for blue-green deployment for example.
- Sub-setting services was impossible in policies which was making things hard to understand, observe and compose across multiple policies.
- The opacity between multi-zone and single zone services was complex. We believe that while multi-zone services are useful the real necessity is cross zone communication. Making all services multi-zone by default was making a lot of simple cross-zone setups harder than they should have been.
- You may want to manage traffic going across zones differently from traffic that is staying inside a zone.

With `MeshService` we now have a dedicated service object which selects a set of data-planes to send traffic to.

> This `MeshService` is defined in both policies and envoy configuration, making it very easy to understand and observe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This `MeshService` is defined in both policies and Envoy configuration, making it very easy to understand and observe.
```

The resources can be labeled which enables policies that applies to whole subset of your services.

> [`MeshService`](/docs/2.9.x/networking/meshservice/) are cross-zone by default but not multi-zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`MeshService`](/docs/2.9.x/networking/meshservice/) is cross-zone by default but not multi-zone.
```

Because the use cases and usability of Kuma is greatly improved we've updated our quickstart to use `MeshService`.
If you want to look at migration check out our  [migrating to mesh service doc](/docs/2.9.x/networking/meshservice/#migration). 

We're also working on a comprehensive guide to help get a handle on `MeshService` and `MeshMultizoneService`.

## Namespaced policies and policy attachment rework for outbound policies

One of the thing that Kuma excels out is its policy system.
Its goal is to be as powerful and expressive as possible and to respond to both of our user's personas: The mesh operator and the service owner.

One part of our vision for policies is to "make policies as easy as Horizontal Pod autoscaler" meaning by this each service owner should be
able to just add their policies in their helm chart.
Up until now this was problematic because policies needed to be applied to the mesh system namespace.
This is no longer the case with namespaced policies where policies can be created in any namespace on a Kubernetes cluster.

This also opened up 2 types of policies:

> - Policies that impacts services that I do control, in this case I should be able to add to these policies configuration that impacts the clients. Because, as the service owner I know best what to do.

Reviewer: can we simplify this point somehow? it is hard to understand what this policy should do

> - Policies that should only impact

Reviewer: missing end of sentence

---
title: Kuma 2.9 release with MeshTLS, Service redesign, GUI updates and more...
description: Kuma 2.9 release with MeshTLS, Service redesign, GUI updates and more...
date: 2024-11-05
headerImage: /assets/images/blog/test-header.jpg
tags:
  - Release
---

We're excited to announce the biggest release of Kuma since 2.0! 
In this release we offer a complete beta release of our service rework and namespaced policies.

# Notable features
In Kuma 2.9.x we've focused on 3 main areas:
* `MeshTLS` which provides a more granular way to roll out strict Mutual TLS.
* New resources `MeshService` and `MeshMultiZoneService` which provide a more intuitive and powerful way to manage services in your mesh.
* A complete rework of our destination policy attachment which works with the new services.
* Introduction of producer and consumer policies, enabling more flexibility for Kubernetes users.

This set of features greatly simplifies Kuma's user experience, by making it clearer how services exist and by attaching policies

> to specific resources. These changes are also fully integrated with our GUI thus making things incredible easy to understand and troubleshoot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to specific resources. These changes are also fully integrated with our GUI thus making things incredibly easy to understand and troubleshoot.
```

This release marks an important step in simplifying the Kuma user experience, empowering both key user roles: mesh administrators and service owners.

Feel free to check our [release notes](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/releases/tag/2.9.0) for the full list of changes.

## New TLS policy

> Mutual TLS is one of the most common use cases in Kuma. This is because it's the base on which you can build fully secured  trust environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mutual TLS is one of the most common use cases in Kuma. This is because it's the base on which you can build fully secured environments.
```

> The most common way to roll out mutual TLS is by first running services in **permissive mode,** in this mode, while the mesh will verify client certificates,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most common way to roll out mutual TLS is by first running services in **permissive mode.** In this mode, while the mesh will verify client certificates,
```

it will still allow unsecured connection.

> You can then progressively remove unsecure connections by moving clients inside the mesh and once it's complete switch to **strict mode.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can then progressively remove insecure connections by moving clients inside the mesh and then finally switch to **strict mode.**
```

Author: So I looked into this one and clearly I think unsecure is more correct than insecure

The def on unsecure is:

unsecure meaning https://g.co/kgs/noU1tdd

This has been long supported in Kuma. However, it was done at the mesh wide level which created an _all or nothing setup._
In 2.9.x we've introduced a policy to apply this to only some data planes, thus enabling easier progressive adoption of strong security.

To check how to do this please checkout the [MeshTLS guide](/docs/2.9.x/guides/progressively-rolling-in-strict-mtls/).

This feature is part of a larger effort to address challenges users may be facing rolling out a service mesh in their production environment.
We are always looking for more input on these challenges, if you are willing to share please feel free to reach out to us on [slack](https://kuma.io/community/).

## New service resources 

> Kuma from the beginning have implicitly extracted services from its data planes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From the beginning, Kuma has always implicitly defined services from its workloads.
```

or maybe "from its Dataplanes` but never "data planes"

> While this was convenient to get started it was coming with the following shortcomings:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While this was convenient for getting started, it came with the following shortcomings:
```

> - It wasn't possible to have multiple services fronting the same port of a data plane, this is required for blue-green deployment for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It wasn't possible to have multiple services fronting the same port of a data plane, which is required for blue-green deployment for example.
```

> - Sub-setting services was impossible in policies which was making things hard to understand, observe and compose across multiple policies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Creating subsets of services was impossible in policies which made things hard to understand, observe and compose across multiple policies.
```

was it impossible or just cumbersome because of having to repeat tags everywhere?

Author: I think just cumbersome

> - The opacity between multi-zone and single zone services was complex. We believe that while multi-zone services are useful the real necessity is cross zone communication. Making all services multi-zone by default was making a lot of simple cross-zone setups harder than they should have been.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The opacity between multi-zone and single zone services complicated things. We believe that while multi-zone services are useful, the real necessity is cross-zone communication. Making all services multi-zone by default made a lot of simple cross-zone setups harder than they should have been.
```

> - You may want to manage traffic going across zones differently from traffic that is staying inside a zone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- You may want to manage traffic going across zones differently from traffic that stays inside a zone.
```

> With `MeshService` we now have a dedicated service object which selects a set of data planes to send traffic to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With [MeshService](/docs/2.9.x/networking/meshservice/) we now have a dedicated service object which selects a set of data planes to send traffic to.
```

Author: I'll get someone from frontend to fix the styles

Author: https://github.com/kumahq/kuma-website/issues/2068

This `MeshService` is defined in both policies and Envoy configuration, making it very easy to understand and observe.

> The resources can be labeled which enables policies that applies to whole subset of your services.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The resources can be labeled which enables policies that apply to whole subset of your services.
```

> [`MeshService`](/docs/2.9.x/networking/meshservice/) is cross-zone by default but not multi-zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`MeshService` is cross-zone by default but not multi-zone.
```

This means that each `MeshService` can only be present in a single zone at time.
However, it can be accessed by other zones thanks to our cross-zone communication setup.

> If you want a service to be multi-zone you need to create a [`MeshMultizoneService`](/docs/2.9.x/networking/meshmultizoneservice/) which will group multiple services inside the same _pseudo-service._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want a service to be multi-zone you need to create a [MeshMultizoneService](/docs/2.9.x/networking/meshmultizoneservice/) which will group multiple services inside the same _pseudo-service._
```
Using special formatting with links hides the information that this is link, I wasn't aware it was link until I moved my mouse over it by accident

> If you want a service to be multi-zone you need to create a [`MeshMultizoneService`](/docs/2.9.x/networking/meshmultizoneservice/) which will group multiple services inside the same _pseudo-service._

Reviewer 2: not sure about "pseudoservice". it's already not fully clear service vs MeshService but pseudoservice complicates it more IMO

Author: tried something else

> Along with `MeshService` we're rolling new ways to address services, this means that we're parting with the `.mesh` addresses that were used in the past we will now

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Along with `MeshService` we're rolling out new ways to address services, this means that we're parting with the `.mesh` addresses that were used in the past. We will now
```

> use addresses that by default are zone and service type specific. This is mostly to make the getting started experience easier and this is configurable for users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
use addresses that by default are zone and service type specific. This is mostly to make the getting started experience easier.
```

sounds repetitive with the next sentence.

> This is configurable with [`HostnameGenerator`](/docs/2.9.x/networking/hostnamegenerator/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is configurable with [HostnameGenerator](/docs/2.9.x/networking/hostnamegenerator/)
```

`MeshService` is currently disabled by default and there's a migration procedure if you want to use it.
Because the use cases and usability of Kuma is greatly improved we've updated our quickstart to use `MeshService`.

> If you want to look at migration check out our  [migrating to mesh service doc](/docs/2.9.x/networking/meshservice/#migration). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to look at the migration check out our [migrating to mesh service doc](/docs/2.9.x/networking/meshservice/#migration). 
```

> We're also working on a comprehensive guide to help get a handle on `MeshService` and `MeshMultizoneService`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We're also working on a comprehensive guide to help users better understand `MeshService` and `MeshMultizoneService`.
```

## Namespaced policies and policy attachment rework for outbound policies

> One of the thing that Kuma excels out is its policy system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the things that Kuma excels at is its policy system.
```

> Its goal is to be as powerful and expressive as possible and to respond to both of our user's personas: The mesh operator and the service owner.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Its goal is to be as powerful and expressive as possible and to respond to both of our user's personas: the mesh operator and the service owner.
```

> One part of our vision for policies is to "make policies as easy as Horizontal Pod autoscaler" meaning by this each service owner should be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One part of our vision for policies is to "make policies as easy as horizontal pod autoscaler." This means each service owner should be
```

> able to just add their policies in their helm chart.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
able to just add their policies where they define their service, like in a helm chart for example.
```

I think?

Up until now this was problematic because policies needed to be applied to the mesh system namespace.

> This is no longer the case with namespaced policies where policies can be created in any namespace on a Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is no longer the case with namespaced policies where policies can be created in any Kubernetes namespace.
```

This update introduces two types of policies: 

1. **Policies impacting clients of a service:** These policies allow service owners to add configurations that affect client behavior, regardless of where those clients are running. Since service owners understand their services best, they have full control over these settings. These policies must be defined where the service is defined.

> 2. **Policies limited to owned data planes:** These policies are restricted to the specific scope in which they're defined—whether that's a namespace, zone, or cluster. This ensures that the policies only impact data planes within the owner's domain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Policies limited to owned data planes:** These policies are restricted to the specific scope in which they're defined — whether that's a namespace, zone, or cluster. This ensures that the policies only impact data planes within the owner's domain.
```

not sure if the character displays fine in the browser but weird when reading the source other wise.

As most of our features you can follow the guide [getting started with producer/consumer policies](/docs/2.9.x/guides/consumer-producer-policies/).

> ## Improving our way to work with docs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Improving how we work with our docs
```

> Kuma's documentation has always been a weak point.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

doesn't add much IMO

In recent versions we started adding guides to help users getting started with different features.

> We've had good feedback and we'll now systematically add guides to all new Kuma features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We've had good feedback about this so we're going to systematically add guides for all new Kuma features.
```

We will also review existing guides as part of our qualification process to keep things as up to date and accurate as possible.

## Upgrading

We strongly suggest upgrading to Kuma 2.9.0. Upgrading is easy through `kumactl` or Helm.

> Be sure to carefully read the [upgrade Guide](/docs/2.9.x/production/upgrades-tuning/upgrades/) and the [version specific upgrade notes](/docs/2.9.x/production/upgrades-tuning/upgrade-notes) before upgrading Kuma.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Be sure to carefully read the [upgrade guide](/docs/2.9.x/production/upgrades-tuning/upgrades/) and the [version specific upgrade notes](/docs/2.9.x/production/upgrades-tuning/upgrade-notes) before upgrading Kuma.
```
